Hi everyone, welcome to session 410,
Designing Standards-Based Devices.
Today we're going to have four speakers.
I'm the first.
So my name is Kai Kaahaaina,
and I work for-- well,
obviously I work for Apple Computer,
but I work for the mass
storage software team,
implementing and maintaining
storage device drivers for OS X.
Today I'll be talking about
USB mass storage class devices.
And so for the next
about 10 to 15 minutes,
we're going to quickly go over the
specifications that we follow and
adhere to when implementing and
maintaining storage drivers in OS X.
Common errors we've had
reported to us by customers,
developers, and our own internal QA.
Mac platform-specific testing
we recommend that you perform
in the course of developing your
USB storage devices for OS X.
And Mac platform-specific-- sorry,
Mac platform enhancements which we
offer you to give your users on the
Mac OS X side a richer experience.
So first up,
the USB specifications that we follow.
Naturally, there's the Universal Serial
Bus Specification and
the Universal Serial
Bus Mass Storage Class Specification,
both of which are extremely important.
I recommend that you should at least
read very thoroughly the Universal Serial
Bus Mass Storage Class Specification.
Next up are the two transport
protocol specifications,
which are
USB Mass Storage Class Bulk-on-Lin
Transport,
which is what the majority of
devices we've seen utilize,
and USB Mass Storage CBI Transport,
which is underutilized
but has many benefits,
and I think many of the devices we
see could have been implemented better
had they used this other transport.
So please consider both before
you start to design a device.
And lastly is the USB/UFI specification.
The USB/UFI specification is of course
for the ubiquitous USB floppy drive,
which is still in production.
I thought it was funny.
So the next category of specifications
which we follow are the-- oh,
and these can be downloaded from t10.org,
by the way, sorry-- are the SCSI primary
command specification,
which all SCSI devices need to adhere to.
And then the next three are a
specification which you would
choose based upon the type of
device you're trying to implement.
So most of your block storage
devices for USB have traditionally
been SCSI block command devices,
or SBC.
And these are going to
be your flash drives,
your mass storage
compliant camera and such.
Next up are SCSI multimedia commands,
MMC, which are all of your
optical-based devices,
so your CD and DVD burners.
And lastly,
there's reduced block commands, or RBC,
which we've largely seen only on
the FireWire side of the world.
But there's absolutely no reason
why you couldn't implement
your USB storage devices,
RBC.
It's actually quite a bit
simpler to implement than SBC,
and I recommend you definitely consider
that if you have the opportunity
to start a device from scratch.
So these are the common device
types that we see the most often.
And these, of course,
are the semi-ubiquitous,
bulk-only transport SBC devices.
These include the Apple iPod,
flash drives, cameras,
media card readers, USB hard drives,
just about everything,
except the following,
which is bulk-only MMC devices,
which again,
are the CD and DVD burners of the world,
and the UFI floppy drives,
which continuously stay in production.
Next up are common errors.
These are the ones we get the
most in regards to internal
testing and tech support calls.
Some of these are architectural
differences between how we handle
certain things such as power management,
like in the case of suspend resume
and other operating systems.
So suspend resume is one of the
power management features that
we try to exercise a lot in OS X.
And we've seen a lot of devices
which simply upon receiving
a suspend or resume command,
just simply freak out.
And they stop working,
and we have to reset the device.
And that's if we know it
doesn't support the command.
If we don't know it doesn't
support the command,
say after sleeping and waking a system,
a user will find that their
device is now not usable.
So that's not good.
So if you're going to
implement a USB storage device,
please ensure that it handles both
USB suspend and USB resume correctly.
Next up is bulk-only reset,
which is part of the
bulk-only transport protocol.
We've actually seen a large number
of devices which just simply
don't implement this feature.
For bulk-only transport devices,
it's our preferred mechanism
for trying to recover a device
after it's encountered an error.
So if this feature isn't
properly implemented,
what happens is there's
the original device error,
then a subsequent error on our
attempt to recover the device,
and then we have to do a second recovery
effort with a full USB device reset,
which is very heavy-handed.
And if it's a multiple interface device,
it can have other consequences.
So we prefer not to do
as much as possible.
But if bulk-only reset
is not implemented,
we have to.
So please support bulk-only reset.
It's there for a very good reason.
Another bulk-only feature which
we sometimes see left off is
the bulk-only get max LUN.
So for us, if this command is
responded to with an error,
we just assume your device
has a max LUN of zero,
which, if you have a multi-LUN device,
is pretty poor because it means only
one of your LUNs is going to get used.
So another thing about Max LUN is not
to confuse Max LUN with LUN count.
We've seen a number of devices
where they report their Max LUN as
a count of their LUNs they have.
So we go to utilize this
phantom fifth or seventh LUN,
which doesn't exist.
So it's very important to not confuse
the two and report the maximum logical
unit number you have for get Max LUN.
And lastly for this slide,
it's very important to us
that you provide a very unique
vendor ID and a product ID.
And there's really two reasons for that.
One is user interfaces
will report this data in,
say, system profile or disk utility.
And it's easier for the user
to tell their devices apart if
they actually have unique IDs.
And the second is,
if we ever have to implement
workarounds in OS X,
we use these keys to help
identify your device.
So another area where we
see a lot of issues is the
SCSI inquiry data for devices.
We see a lot of devices where they report
the additional length with inquiry data,
additional length incorrectly.
So as a consequence,
we either end up asking for too
much or too little inquiry data,
and that just never ends well.
So the next two fields are for your
product and vendor identification
strings in the inquiry data.
We've seen a lot of devices
which simply say generic,
or storage, or USB mass storage,
or blank.
And we have a number of apps like
Disk Utility and Disk Recording
where the user is going to try
to select your device from a
field or from a pop-up menu,
and they're not going to
quite understand that,
oh, my DVD burner is a generic
bulk-only storage device,
you know, blah, blah, blah.
So please choose sensible
and unique product and vendor
strings to identify your device,
because the user will see these.
And lastly, product revision level.
Every time you release a new
revision of your product and
you've done all the work,
please bump the product
revision level as well.
It makes it easier for us when we
get bugger requests to say which
version of your device was used
which may have caused a problem
that we need to address in the host.
So, one we've been seeing more and
more lately is devices which,
in the ModeSense data,
do not properly report back,
if whether or not the
device is write-protected.
So, obviously what happens here is
that we assume that the device
isn't write-protected if it reports
itself as not being write-protected.
And we end up with this kind of mismatch
between what the GUI represents and
what the actual state of the machine is.
So we get these cases with,
in particular, certain phones, per se,
where the user, it looks like,
for all intents and purposes,
can copy a file to their phone.
But they can't because it's
actually write-protected.
And we get really bizarre
errors for the user,
which makes for a really
poor user experience.
So please,
honestly report write-protected
status correctly.
Next is manual eject.
And this is kind of a trickier one.
So in OS X, we like to control the
media as much as possible.
Because we're trying to prevent users
from untimely removing media from
a device before we've had a chance
to gracefully unmount the volume.
This is particularly true of devices
which are using a journaled file system.
So how we do this is we send
a start-stop command-- sorry,
a prevent-allow-media-removal command.
And if you can't physically bar the user
from removing the media-- let's say you
have a flash card reader or some such--
it's very important that you report
back not supported or failed a command
so that we know we need to pull your
device for media removal or addition.
Synchronize cache.
So the primary file system
of OS X is HFS+ journaled,
or HFS+J.
And part of what makes this
file system work correctly,
especially the journal aspect,
is support for the
synchronized cache command.
And we've seen a large number of USB to
ATA and SATA bridges which simply
take the synchronized cache command
and then drop it on the floor and
never pass it on to the ATA device.
As a result,
we defeat a lot of the good support
that the journal file systems get us.
And this isn't just for HFS+J,
it's for a lot of the number of Linux and
other journal file systems which exist.
So, especially if you're
doing USB hard drives,
it's very important that you support
the synchronized cache command.
Next up is max transfer size.
We've seen a lot of devices which
simply just do not provide more than
128 blocks in a single transfer.
For performance reasons in OS X,
we like to reduce the amount
of overhead for doing large
transfers as much as possible.
So we will always try to ask for
as much data as we think we can
reasonably get from your device.
So please try to support more
than 128 block transfers.
And if you can't,
please don't pad out the rest
of the request with zeros,
because we've seen that too.
That leads to data corruption.
So Mac OS X-specific testing.
It's real basic.
What we recommend most often is just
connect your device and plug it in,
make sure it mounts, make sure it works,
copy files,
try to do all the basic things
you would expect a user to do.
But in addition to that,
also try doing sleep-wake testing,
where you put the system to sleep,
wake it up, and make sure the device
still works correctly.
If you have a removable media device,
we recommend that you try
putting it to sleep and then
waking up without media in it,
and then try to see if it'll still
accept new media after it wakes up.
and also do some restart testing
where you power off the machine
and then turn it back on or restart
from a powered-on Mac to see if
the device remounts after power on.
And lastly,
try testing with some non-FAT16
or FAT32 file systems.
HFS+ and HFSJ work a
little bit differently,
so it's great if you can
try them out on your device,
in addition to the FAT and FAT32
file systems you'll be using
mostly for other operating systems.
So some cool enhancements
we have for OS X.
So we have a lot of media card
readers that we use at work,
for personal and for professional use.
And they're kind of neat.
But the thing that's kind of
disappointing about them is,
it doesn't matter what kind
of media you put into them,
you get the same icon.
So it doesn't matter if you put
in smart media or compact flash,
you're going to get the same
generic white removal media icon.
So we thought of a really
cool way of making it so that
you can get more than this.
So how this works is,
there's a vendor specific data
field in your inquiry data.
And what you can do is,
you can put in the correct
identification string for one of
the icons we have into this field,
and when we see that you have new media,
we will then read your inquiry data
and parse the string in this field.
If it matches with one
of the ones in our table,
we give you the icon appropriate.
So if you use our strings and put it
in the right place at the right time,
so what does that get you?
Well, today I'll get you this
if you don't do it,
or if it's a string
that we don't recognize.
It's the generic rule media
icon which you've had since
as far as I can remember.
But let's say you put in
the string for smart media,
you could have something which
looks much more like this.
Which, you know,
actually looks like what was
the user put into their media,
which-- sorry, put into the reader,
which, if you're running with multiple
types of media at the same time,
enables you to tell one apart from
the other without even having to
bother to read the volume name.
So,
do we support more than the smart media?
Oh yeah.
So we have CompactFlash, Smart Media,
MemoryStick,
Secure Digital and MMC,
which at the moment I'll omit
are actually the same icon,
but I'm working on that.
And that's what we have in Tiger today.
You can actually go home,
edit your firmware for your device,
and try these out now.
These have been shipping since
10.4.2 and are not going anywhere.
So what are we bringing to Leopard?
We're adding a few more.
We're adding XD, MiniSD,
MemoryStick Duo Pro, and TransFlash.
Now, I've only brought these up in the
context of media card readers.
There's absolutely no reason
why you couldn't use this
for your digital camera,
phone, or anything else.
You just need to put the right
string into the inquiry data.
If you have any other ideas for
what you want your device to be,
you can always contact ADC,
and we can see what we can do.
It's a neat little enhancement,
and we think it provides for a better
experience for your Mac customers.
And, well, I like it,
because I've got to do
something gooey for a change.
So with that, I will please ask Nana to
come up to the stage.
Thank you, Kai.
I would like to tell the people
in the overflow room that we
have a couple seats left here and
you're welcome to come on over.
My name is Fernando Urbina and I'm going
to talk to you about the USB video class.
This is like the third or fourth
year that I've been mentioning it.
And finally,
we're coming to the point in the
market where a lot of hardware
developers and firmware developers
are producing these devices.
And I'm really looking forward
now to having lots of options
with supporting these new devices.
The official name of the spec that
you can find in the USB Implementers
Forum is the Universal Serial
Bus Device Class Definition
for Video Devices.
And currently it's at Revision 1.1.
The changes from 1.0 to 1.1 were
fairly minor and were based just
on some feedback that we received
once it got out into the public.
If you are developing a device,
I want a sample of it.
I want to make sure that my driver
works with as many devices as possible.
There's lots of things that you can
implement and that you can not implement,
or perhaps implement a
little bit differently.
So it would be great if we have
samples so that we can test them,
make sure they work,
and your customers will be happy.
The spec itself is composed of
four different sets of documents.
There is the core video specification
that has all the descriptors,
the requests, negotiation,
everything that is at
a fairly general level.
Then we have what we call the
payload format specifications.
Quite obviously,
each of these documents describe
different payload formats that are
supported by the spec and how they look
and what needs to be in the data stream,
etc.
There's also a transport terminal
specification for devices where you
can actually send video and control the
playing of that video on the device.
That's from host to device.
And there's a couple of
miscellaneous documents.
One that is the identifiers document
that actually has the values that are
used in the different descriptors.
An example of a simple video class
device and how all the descriptors look.
And finally,
there's also a frequently asked
question document that is fairly good.
To tell you about how we reach some of
the decisions on what we're supporting
and maybe some things that are not
quite clear in the specification,
but that they're valuable for
you to read and see how it works.
In Mac OS X, since Tiger came out,
we have supported USB, UVC devices,
modules on bugs.
But that keeps getting better
as I get more devices and
can test my software better.
We still only support webcams
that have a motion JPEG or
uncompressed payload format.
We have not seen many, if any,
devices that support the still
image portion of the specification,
so we don't have that
support in there yet.
If and when we start
getting those devices,
we are going to add that support
and tie it in somehow with
the image capture framework.
We are looking at how best to support
extension units from the specification.
Extension units are...
A method to allow vendors
to extend the specification.
We obviously don't want
vendors to have to reinvent
the wheel and implement a whole
UVC driver in order to add support
to their particular enhancements.
So if you have any thoughts
about how best it would be for
us to implement this support,
please get in touch with me and I will
be more than happy to listen and
see what we can do to best do that.
Currently we only expose the traditional
analog control of brightness,
saturation, hue that QuickTime exposes.
So there is no way for us to test
in a generic way the white balance,
auto exposure, power line frequency,
all those other processing unit
requests that the SPECTOX2,
that the RSS talks about.
But I'm looking into ways that will allow
me to expose this at least for testing.
UVC webcams will be supported in
that part in iChat and Photo Booth.
We are also looking at supporting
other payload formats from the spec.
Again,
this is possible only if we get devices
that support other payload formats.
As far as testing your device,
there's two sections.
One's testing it at the
USB implementer's forum level,
and that's what I call
the compliance testing.
First of all,
you should make sure that your
device is a good USB citizen,
and that's why you use the USB-CV tool
from the Implementers Forum.
In order to use this tool,
you need to use Windows and
attach it to a high-speed hub.
Of course,
you can now use Boot Camp on the
same hardware and test it that way.
And it is essentially a Chapter 9 test,
Chapter 9 of the USB 2.0 spec.
The latest beta of this
USB-CV tool is 1.3 beta,
and that has support for verification
of USB video class devices.
It is only an indication,
it's only a descriptor
type of verification.
Obviously, it doesn't test whether all
your formats do display video,
add frame rates, and all that stuff.
But it is something that will
give you an idea whether all your
descriptors are correct or not.
Finally, I'm sure that if you're
developing a UVC device,
you would also test with Windows XP,
but I put that bullet anyways
to remind you to do so.
On the Mac OS, the software entity that
includes the UVC driver is the
QuickTime USB VDC Digitizer
component that lives in the
system library QuickTime folder.
Time Player Pro will
allow you to preview,
Video Streaming and Recording:
Over on the developer site,
we have WAC-TV and the venerable HAC-TV.
You can download this, compile,
it allows you to
To change things and you have
the source code so you can
do lots of things with it.
You also can access the video settings
and get at the analog controls
that are exposed by QuickTime that
you cannot do in QuickTime Player.
Of course,
we have USB Prober that is installed by
the developer tools and by our logging
families that are on the website.
And that allows you to look at
the descriptors for your device.
I have tried to do my best to make
sure that the coding is correct,
but if you find a bug,
please submit a bug report so
that I can go ahead and fix it.
One thing that you should know is
that we use the USB product name to
display the camera name to the user.
For example, iChat will use your camera
name for the preview window.
So put something in there that is good,
that identifies your device,
instead of just, like Kai was saying,
a generic name.
A couple of things that
are specific to Mac OS,
and the first one is
bandwidth management.
Once we do the probe-commit
negotiation to arrive at a
certain setting for your device,
I will go and look for the
alternate interface that has the
same or higher amount of bandwidth.
But then,
after I select that alternate interface,
I will go and use our SetPipePolicy
API to return bandwidth to the system.
And I use the negotiated DW Max Payload
Transfer size to arrive at the bandwidth
that your device is going to use.
So if you don't report a correct
Max Payload Transfer size,
your device is going to overrun.
And when we get overruns on ISOC,
we drop the frame because
we won't get the data.
And I've seen some prototype
devices that actually did that.
So be sure that Max Payload
Transfer size is reported correctly.
Under QuickTime,
as opposed to in the Windows world,
when you are previewing,
you have no control over the
format that the preview is in.
Like YUV 422 or Motion JPEG if the
camera supports both of them at the
same frame rate and the same size.
The digitizer component essentially
chooses which one it will report,
and as it happens,
we always report YUV uncompressed
if it's available.
So I have a little default that will
allow you to test motion JPEG by
telling the video digitizer that you
would like to prefer motion JPEG.
And the command that you would
use is up there on the screen.
Once the digitizer sees this,
then it'll prefer motion
JPEG and you can preview that.
With that,
I would like to bring up Russ Winspear to
talk about communication class devices.
Thank you.
Thank you, Daniel.
My name is Russ Winsper,
and I am responsible for the
communications class driver,
amongst other things,
and commonly known as the
CDC driver or comms class driver.
I'm going to talk a little
bit about the standard itself,
what we've implemented,
and then go a little bit into
the architecture of the driver,
and then touch on some common problems.
The CDC standard really is defined
as a number of control models
that are kind of roughly grouped
into the groups you see here.
There's actually currently
13 models described.
Modems has about four.
ISDN has a couple.
The networking, there's a couple more.
Basically, the most common,
which is the abstract
control model for modems,
the Ethernet control
model for networking,
and a fairly new one,
which is the device management model,
and I'll get into that
a little bit later.
The abstract control model
modem assumes that on the end
of the wire is a full-function
modem with everything in there,
data access arrangement, data pump,
and all those kinds of things.
The other models which define kind
of less functionality in the device,
there's the direct line model,
the telephone line model,
so by far the most common is
the abstract control model.
The Ethernet control model is an attempt
to allow a host to be connected to
Ethernet using a USB-connected device.
And unfortunately,
there's a few shortcomings in
the Ethernet control model,
which have kind of not
made it widely implemented.
By Ethernet devices,
but it did find a home with
cable modems and DSL devices,
so it is used.
And then the device management
model is fairly new,
and it really revolves around
multi-function devices and the ability
to control them on a device basis.
And again, I'll talk a little bit
more about that later.
Futures.
Basically,
Apple has planned to support class
devices if the devices appear.
We're currently
interested in a new model,
which is the Ethernet Emulation Model.
This really differs from the Ethernet
control model in the fact that it's built
for low-cost devices that don't really
want to have a full media access control
in them and connect them to the host.
So it's not connecting
a host to Ethernet,
it's connecting a device to the host,
using Ethernet-like protocols.
Currently being worked on is a
new model that's being called
the Network Control Model.
This may not be its final name.
The thrust of this is really to
change some of the shortcomings
in the Ethernet control model.
And what it'll finally turn out
to be is going to be interesting.
As the work goes on,
they're pushing a little bit
higher up into the IP stack.
And again, that may or may not be
the case in the end.
But we'll see.
It's very, very early.
And in fact, the early draft,
I'm not even sure .8's been posted yet.
But they're in that very,
very early stage.
And again, like some of the other
guys have mentioned,
the best way to get Apple's
attention with any of these new
devices is to send us a device.
And we'll see if we can make it work.
Okay, just a few words about the
USB Implementers Forum.
The CDC Device Working Group is
an active working group,
which I've mentioned.
They are working on the
network control model.
I did talk a little bit about the
differences between ECM and the NCM.
But again, NCM is trying to fix some
of the shortcomings of ECM.
And the specs are posted at
the approved docs website.
What I'd like to talk about now is a
little bit about the driver architecture,
which we changed fairly recently.
And there's been a number
of questions about,
first of all, why we changed it.
And then what we did to it made
it a little more complicated
from an overall point of view,
but actually made some of the
drivers a bit more easier.
But anyway,
starting with the hardware and
the USB family devices plugged in,
device matching gets kicked off,
and we have a very small
device driver that gets loaded.
This guy looks at the device
to make sure there's a valid
configuration we can play with,
either Ethernet or
abstract control model.
And if there is,
he then does a set configuration,
turns around,
which causes interface matching.
Now, the way the standard's built,
there's a control interface and
a data interface for each entity,
for ACM and ECM,
for the Ethernet and the ECM,
and for the ACM.
And so, for the simulation model,
that's not true, but for the main two
that we've implemented,
it's true.
So,
we have to load two interface drivers,
one for control, one for data.
These interface drivers then,
with the help of the device driver,
have to rendezvous -- rendezvous being
a generic term here -- with one another.
And so, the right control driver and the
right data driver can hook up and
provide the services that they need.
Once that's happened,
the ECM takes a look at the
specifics of the interfaces,
and if he figures that we can
actually drive this device,
he then creates the necessary
ports through the upper layers,
with, in the case of the ACM,
the serial family,
and in the case of the ECM,
the networking family.
So, from a --
From a high level,
it looks fairly complicated,
but in actual fact,
the ACM control and ACM data
drivers and the ECM control and
ECM data drivers are a lot simpler
than the original device driver.
And again, why did we do this?
Initially, when we first started to see
modems in particular appear,
they were single-function devices
with just one interface on them,
with one CDC interface on them.
They had a control and data interface,
obviously.
And a single-device driver
was OK for these devices.
Then we started to see
multi-function devices.
We started to see devices with
mass storage interfaces on them.
We started to see them with
audio interfaces on them.
We started to see one of the
standards as an OBEX interface.
So interface drivers are
definitely the way to go.
So we had to change it to make
sure that once our device-- if
it's classed as a COM device,
once our device driver
instantiates the interfaces,
or does the set config to
instantiate the interfaces,
then the right drivers get loaded for
the other devices-- the mass storage,
the audio, and all the others.
So that was really the
reason-- like I say,
it looks a bit more complicated.
But in actual fact,
it's kind of made it a little easier.
And lastly, common problems.
Again, what we see, a couple of the guys
have already touched on,
Kai in particular, suspend and resume.
Suspend and resume never seems to work.
And if you suspend a device that
doesn't like being suspended,
it does weird and wonderful things.
So if you're building devices,
make sure that they
support suspend and resume.
And the other problem we see with com
class devices are problems with the,
what's called a functional descriptors.
And we see problems with where,
sometimes where these functional
descriptors are placed,
placed in the wrong place,
so that once we've found
the control interface,
we can't find the functional descriptors.
And then common problems are the
union descriptors and some of the
SCM functional descriptors and the
ECM functional descriptors pointing
to the wrong data descriptor.
And if that happens,
especially if there's more than
one interface on a device or
we've got multiple devices and
we have a real hard time hooking
up the right control and data.
So just make sure that you really
have the right descriptors sorted
out in the functional descriptors.
And basically, that's kind of it.
I turn it over now to
Torrey and talk about audio.
Thank you for not
handing me the sharp end.
My name is Torrey Walker.
I'm with the CPU Audio Software team,
and I'm going to be talking a little
bit about the USB audio device class.
So, show of hands here,
how many of you have ever taken, say,
a USB headset, or microphone,
or breakout box, or anything like that,
plugged it into your computer,
and have it just work?
And keep your hands up if you like
the fact that you didn't have to
install a driver to get that to happen.
Alright, so this is what the class
driver is going to afford you.
In Mac OS X, the class driver is
called Apple USB Audio,
and it supports full-speed
devices that's USB 1.1,
full-speed devices that
conform to the USB device class
specification for audio devices,
release version 1.0,
which I'm just going to call the
USB audio spec from here on out.
And it's available for
download at USB.org.
It's going to allow access to the
basic functions of your audio device.
Even when there's no
third-party driver present,
it's going to be thoroughly tested
from release to release to make
sure that compatibility is retained.
And that will allow some immunity
to things like platform changes,
moving from PPC to Intel,
32-bit to 64-bit.
Also,
it hides the differences between the
three different USB controller types,
OHCI, UHCI, and EHCI.
So, the user doesn't have to
be concerned about them,
and nor does the developer.
Also, it peacefully coexists
with third-party drivers,
so if you want to write a driver
still to support your device,
then we report a low match
score and we'll gracefully back
away and let you support it.
So...
How can I design a class-compliant
USB audio device using
established technology?
Well, if you're already adhering
to the USB specification,
all you basically need to do is make sure
that you properly report the capabilities
of your device in the descriptor,
which is basically section 4
of the USB audio specification.
So, I want to talk a little bit about
what works and what causes problems,
and then we'll discuss a
few techniques for designing
class-compliant descriptors.
So, what works in USB Audio 1.0?
Number one, simple device topologies.
There are a number of different
units and terminals that are
supported by the class driver,
and a few of them we can
use to publish controls,
such as Feature Unit or Selector Unit.
However, we have to make a choice
about which of these to use to
publish controls to the user.
For example, let's say that you have a
very simple device topology,
and this one has just an input
terminal and an output terminal
between it and an extension unit,
which the driver is not
going to know what to do with
because that's vendor-specific.
But then there's a single
feature unit that has controls.
Now, for this speaker jack,
or for this speaker,
we know that if there are
going to be controls that are
published for this device,
they have to be associated
with this one feature unit,
because there's only
one on the signal path,
there's no ambiguity.
On the other hand,
if you want to take a look at a
little more complex example here,
you'll see that there are
two feature units here,
and there's a mixer unit between them,
and then maybe the mixer unit is
connected to other stuff as well.
The driver has to make a
choice about which of these
to use to publish controls,
and if there's more than one,
we're going to make a choice,
but there's no guarantee that
it's going to be the one that the
developer had actually intended.
So you can help avoid confusion like
that by only publishing what you
actually want the controls to come from.
Another thing that works in
USB 1.0 audio is reporting the
maximum packet size correctly.
I want to mention this specifically
because we used to not care,
and now we do.
If your maximum packet size is too low,
you could end up generating overruns,
and that will cause streaming
artifacts to make your beautiful,
soothing classical music sound
like something that will truly
make your hair stand on end.
You can guess I've probably had a few
experiences with devices like this,
and other unpredictable
behavior could also occur.
Another thing that works:
publishing compatible
input and output formats.
This is probably the most
egregious and widespread
problem that I see with devices.
If a device cannot simultaneously support
two different types of sample formats,
then they cannot be
published at the same time.
This isn't explicitly
written in the specification,
but it kind of follows as
an unwritten corollary.
Take for example,
you've got a device that supports
two different sample rates:
44.1 and 48k for input and output.
However,
you've got this single sample clock
that has to control both of them.
So if the user says, "Hey,
let me change the input sample
rate from 44.1 to 48k," and
the output moves as well,
the driver has no way to know that.
And because of that,
you'll start to generate things
like overruns and errors,
and then eventually, you know,
your device may sound like this.
Okay?
So, one way to work around this is to
maybe provide a hardware switch.
And the hardware switch will provide a
different descriptor for each setting,
where there will only be this
one sample rate that's supported.
So maybe, while it's set at 44.1,
the device can only do 44.1.
You switch it to 48k, unplug it,
plug it back in, new descriptor,
only 48k.
If something like this is beyond
the scope of your hardware project,
you may even want to consider
only publishing a single sample
rate that you think will be very
important to your customers.
And this way,
there's not going to be any confusion.
How do I go class-compliant?
One way to do this is to go out and
acquire a class-compliant device and
check out its descriptor using USBProber,
which is included in
the developer's package.
Also, Apple USB Audio is open source.
You can download it, compile it,
take a look at what
Apple USB Audio does for your device.
You can look at the logging in
USB Prober using USB logging.
You can download the FireWire
SDK and change it to printf style,
and look at that logging as well.
And also examine the
logs of other devices,
particularly if your device
is doing something wrong,
you can take a look at a device
that does something right,
and try to figure out what
the difference is there.
Also,
if you're going to use Apple USB Audio as
a base for your third-party driver,
please keep in mind the
open source agreement.
If you make changes to the driver,
then you need to make your
changes public so that other
people can look at them as well.
Finally, use Apple as a resource.
We really want to help you
develop class-compliant stuff.
So if you send us a
device and you're like,
"Hey, I think I'm doing this right,
but I see strange behavior under
Mac OS X," we'll take a look at it.
And if there's a problem with the driver,
we will fix it.
And if it's a problem with your firmware,
please fix it.
All right, so what's on the horizon?
USB 2.0 audio.
So the question here is,
how can I make my USB 2.0 audio
device work with a class driver?
Right now there's no support for USB 2.0
audio descriptors in the class driver,
but the specification
has yet to be released.
So the rapidity with which
Apple USB audio will come to
support these devices will depend on
how quickly we get devices that have
class-compliant firmware that we
can use to bring up our new driver.
Once again,
the support will basically come
from what capabilities are reported
by the device and the descriptor.
So, I'll talk a little bit about
the audio specification,
Frankenstein devices,
as we like to call them,
and why you shouldn't develop them.
And then we'll talk a little bit
about one of the largest changes
about the new specification:
clock domains.
So, the USB 2.0 audio spec.
It's in review right now and will
soon be available for download.
Actually, I was hitting refresh on a web
page while Nano was speaking,
sorry, and it's not up there yet,
but I do expect it to
be posted very soon.
And it will be for download in USB.org.
Actually, there was a better link
earlier that was provided.
It's in the developer section.
It supports both full
and high-speed devices.
So if you've got a full-speed device
and you want to take advantage of
something in the USB 2.0 audio spec,
you don't necessarily have to be
a high-speed device to use it.
The USB 2.0 audio spec contains some
major changes to the USB 1.0 audio spec.
Particularly,
there are some changes in the
standard device descriptors,
so if you're familiar with how
they were formatted before,
double-check them and make
sure that they still work.
And also, these changes are going to be
detailed in a document called
Migrating USB 1.0 Audio to USB 2.0,
which is going to be made available
to you shortly after the specification
has finally been released.
Most of the work is already done on this,
but it would be irresponsible of me to
provide it to you without first verifying
it against the final specification.
So, now, Frankenstein devices.
Maybe this name caught your attention.
A Frankenstein device is a high-speed
device that broadcasts a USB 1.0
audio specification descriptor.
Meaning,
you say you're a high-speed device,
but you're acting like you can be
supported by this old specification.
Now, this is bad because the USB 2.0
audio spec specifically disallows
the creation of such devices.
And I've seen a lot of devices now where,
say, you've got a composite device
that has video on it and audio.
And it's a high-speed device,
so it can move all that video media.
And then it has the USB 1.0
audio descriptor as well.
This can cause a lot of problems.
And I've heard that there are a number
of Frankenstein devices that have
already been released into the wild.
But even if they do appear
to work fine with Mac OS X,
this is not by design.
Apple USB Audio does not
officially support these devices.
And moreover,
if you decide to make a device like this,
you do it at your own peril.
Apple USB Audio could be changed to
disallow the support of these devices.
So if you want to make a
high-speed USB audio device,
you need to go ahead and start
taking a look at the specification.
And get us a device,
and we'll help you out with it.
[Transcript missing]
If you have the same clock source,
we can put you on the
same I/O audio engine,
which is something we were
never able to do before.
If you've ever taken a look at
digital audio workstations software,
and you plug in a USB audio
device that has input and output,
a lot of times you'll see them
show up as two different devices.
We have to assume that they're
independent because we don't know.
But in USB 2.0, we do,
and we can finally take that
and put them on the same engine.
Now, if I can get you to take anything
away from this talk at all,
I would say first of all,
if you follow the specification,
we will do your driver
development for you.
I don't know any other
way I can put that to say,
we're going to do free work for
you if you just give us a device
and you try to follow the spec.
Okay?
Next, if Apple USB audio is not
suitable for your device,
let us know so we can improve it.
One of the biggest complaints in the past
about Apple USB audio was the latency.
Our round trip latency through
Core Audio was about 16 milliseconds.
Well, I'm proud to announce that since
our first shipping Intel Macs,
on PPC and Intel,
the round trip latency is just a
little bit over 9 milliseconds.
So that's something that you can
look forward to if you were worried
about... You can clap if you want.
If you were worried about the latency
of the Apple USB Audio driver,
maybe it won't be as big a
concern for you right now.
And if there are other advanced
features supported by the specification
that the driver doesn't deal with,
let us know.
We'll put that support in for you.
Also, I also want to stress,
you can be class-compliant and
still write your own driver.
But when you write your own driver,
you provide yourself a certain
immunity to different platform changes.
Like, the new Mac Pros are coming out,
moving 32-64-bit DMA.
With Apple USB Audio,
you're already good to go.
You plug in your device, it still works.
And the same was true when
we moved from PPC to Intel.
You plug in your device,
it was still good to go.
Because we test from
revision to revision,
we make sure that this stuff
continues to work for you.
Now, if your device is class-compliant,
and your driver doesn't
work on a new architecture,
you can always say to your users,
why don't you remove our driver for now,
and let it be
class-compliant for a while,
and then we'll provide a new
driver for you in the future.
This way,
your customers can continue to use your
device while you do your driver bring-up.
And finally,
if you are designing a full or
high-speed class-compliant device,
let us know so we can help
you make it class-compliant.
And with that, I will turn it over to our
fifth of four speakers,
Eric Anderson.
Okay, I was going to make a joke
about the four speakers,
but that's already been done for me,
so moving right along.
It's the same message
as the first four said.
We do want you to differentiate.
We want you to make unique,
novel products on your terms.
Differentiate to make
your product better,
not just by mistake to make it
different so that we have to
cope with it in the drivers.
The best way is to start with a
standard and then differentiate
from there to add value.
So I'm going to go over a variety
of FireWire standards that
we have standard support for.
These are places you could
start to base a product on.
For each of these, I'll show you where to
get the specifications,
how to match your device,
and review some of the common
hazards that you might run into.
Much of the information
will be duplicated,
so the mass storage section will
have a lot in it that really
applies to the other five as well.
In this section,
there's going to be reference to a
lot of tools in the FireWire SDK,
so to try any of this stuff out,
just go on the web and download the SDK.
It's at the URL that you see there.
So, mass storage and SCSI-like devices.
Probably the most common thing we
find on FireWire is a hard drive,
or an optical drive,
or something that has a
sort of SCSI architecture,
like maybe a high-end scanner.
The standards for these come from T10,
the same as Kai mentioned earlier.
These devices are often
architected using a bridge.
So, as the picture illustrates,
you have a box, which is your hard drive.
Most of it is occupied by a
hard drive mechanism inside
that has some native interface,
like Serial ATA.
That native interface connects to a
bridge that turns it into FireWire,
which then connects to PHY silicon,
which actually drives the FireWire ports.
Illustrated here is a device
with two FireWire 800 ports
and one FireWire 400 port,
all driven from the same PHY silicon.
So, that's what we normally see
in this kind of product,
is this architecture of these
devices chained together like that.
So, how do we support that in software?
We have two drivers
that may matter to you.
One is in the boot ROM,
so that we can boot from
FireWire storage devices,
and the other is built into Mac OS X,
so that they will appear in the Finder.
These drivers match the
1394 configuration ROM that
we find in your device.
Specifically,
you publish a unit directory
indicating that you use the SBP2,
or Serial Bus Protocol 2, protocol.
This is the first place that
you need to differentiate,
is in the config ROM.
You need to indicate
your vendor and model ID,
and you need to indicate a unique
serial number in every device.
In FireWire, that's known as a GUID,
Globally Unique ID.
Shown here on the lower left
is Apple System Profiler
for a FireWire hard drive.
Actually, it's a Mac in target disk
mode that I plugged in.
Shown on the right is one
of the tools from the SDK,
Firecracker, which shows the 1394
configuration ROM in that device.
So I just want to briefly
point out how these correlate.
In the red block, you can see the GUID.
It's a 64-bit number that comes from
near the top of the configuration ROM.
And that has been decoded a little bit by
Firecracker to show who the vendor ID is,
for example.
At the bottom,
you can see that also shows
up in Apple System Profiler,
just as a 16-bit hex number.
And then a little further down,
in the config ROM in the root directory,
there's two very important keys.
Key 17-hex is the model ID.
It's a 24-bit number that says,
"Of all the great products you make,
which one is this?"
And that key is immediately
followed by a text leaf that has an
ASCII string describing the product.
In this case, you can see the ASCII bytes
for target disk mode,
and that's what we put in
Apple System Profiler to tell
the user what this device is.
So, I mentioned it's common to use
bridge silicon to make these devices.
If you start with an evaluation kit from,
say, the Cambridge Semiconductor Company,
and you plug it in,
the config ROM may have
been filled in for you,
but it may say something like
Cambridge Semiconductor Evaluation Kit.
So, it's going to look kind of
dumb if that's what the user
sees in Apple System Profiler
when they buy your device.
So, don't forget to go in here and
change it to something sensible
that identifies your device.
Another area that you need to check
on your device is the self-ID packet.
All FireWire devices,
not just mass storage,
send a short packet when
they're plugged in as the first
step towards device discovery.
A storage device generally is not
prepared to manage the FireWire bus,
and so should not accidentally
claim that it wants to take control,
because we're very trusting
and we might let it.
So use the FireStarter tool,
also from the SDK,
to check out the self-ID
that your device sends.
FireStarter shows the bus topology
at the very lowest level and
decodes a number of the bits so
that you can see what they mean.
The three that are important
here are the contender bit,
which needs to be zero so that
you don't accidentally end up
in charge of the FireWire bus.
The link bit needs to be one so
that we know there is somebody home
and we should try to talk to you.
And the power class should be set,
whether you're consuming
power or providing power.
consuming power, providing power, or not.
So, just run Firestarter,
plug your device in.
What's shown here is a two-node bus,
let's zoom in on that.
Node 1 is Firestarter itself,
the Mac that it's running on.
So by careful elimination,
we can discover that
your device is Node 0.
So then you can see the
link bit is properly set.
It says LINK in all capital letters.
The power class in this
case says up to 10 watts.
But the contender bit isn't shown in
this line because it's somewhat obscure.
But you can deduce that by
looking down at the bottom,
where we have totals for
all the devices on the bus.
And on this two-node bus,
there are zero nodes with
their contender bit set.
So you've obviously got it right.
Yours must be zero.
It's very easy.
Okay,
these devices typically need firmware.
If at all possible, you should use the
Silicon Vendor's firmware,
because this firmware is very
difficult to debug buried deep
inside the peripheral device.
And it's easy to make mistakes in
there that don't appear right away,
they only come up under stress
with multiple devices or so on,
and it's really unpleasant to the user
if they have to update the firmware
in the device just to keep it working.
If you do need to differentiate there,
if you're going to add
some unique features,
that's okay,
but please test it thoroughly.
Don't just plug it into
Windows and it mounts on the
desktop and say you're done.
There's more to it than that.
Ideally, do both.
Use the vendor's firmware
and test it thoroughly.
How does the software matching work?
In the kernel,
the IOFireWireSBP2 KEXT loads
when we see that unit directory
that I showed earlier.
If you have an RBC device,
like Kai mentioned,
this is common in FireWire,
that's reduced block commands
for a simple storage device,
then IO FireWire Serial
Bus Protocol Transport KEXT loads
and provides storage-level services,
or at least the lowest part thereof.
This, if you need to subclass
or do your own driver,
this would be a good place to do it.
You can either subclass
for minor changes or,
like Torrey described,
while honoring the open
source requirements,
just make a complete copy of that driver
and then customize it to your needs.
If you do that, please make sure,
like I mentioned this morning,
match carefully against your
device so that you don't mistakenly
end up being the driver for
every hard drive out there.
But all of these services
are available in user space.
There is the SCSI Task User Client for
talking to SCSI architecture devices.
There's also an SPP2 User Client if you
need a little bit lower level access.
So if your device is not
something that can be booted from,
like it's a high-end scanner, say,
you can probably do this all in user
space and it's a lot easier there.
Okay, here's some common hazards that you
may run into with this kind of device.
The first would be if your
globally unique ID turns out
to not actually be unique.
If you've got an eval board
from Cambridge Semiconductor,
it may have ID 12345.
That's fine.
If you plug it in, it'll work.
Until you plug in another one
of those that's also 12345,
now we can't tell them apart.
So we're having no tolerance
policy towards this.
That device is immediately blacklisted.
Not only will we not
talk to the second one,
we will cut off communication
with the first one because we just
can't cope with two hard drives
and we don't know which is which.
It's dangerous.
So your customer should
never encounter this,
but you might run into
it during development.
So it's a good reminder to make
sure your GUID really is unique.
Something else that customers don't do,
but testers do a lot,
is to unplug a device and
then plug it right back in.
You're trying to test the
robustness of your hot plug support,
so you get pretty good at this,
it starts going really fast.
So here's what happens.
You drag the hard drive to the trash,
you unplug it, you plug it right back in,
and nothing happens.
Why is this?
Well, the FireWire stack is designed to
have some patience before it decides
that something's been unplugged.
Maybe you bumped the power cable,
maybe you plugged in a third device,
and there's a temporary power shortage.
So when your device disappears,
we don't instantaneously tear down
your stack and say you're out of there.
We wait a few seconds to
make sure it's really gone.
Once you get good at this,
you can plug it back in so fast
that we think it was never away,
and so your driver
doesn't unload and reload,
and so your icon doesn't
reappear on the desktop.
So if this happens to you during testing,
just unplug, wait 10 seconds,
use a stopwatch or a clock,
because most people wait
about two seconds otherwise,
plug it back in, everything will be fine.
Finally, sorry, two more things.
The FireWire 800 silicon that's available
today can support a FireWire 400 port.
A lot of our Mac products do this,
we offer both, and we've seen it on
hard drives a lot also.
That's fine.
Be sure to tell the
silicon what you're doing.
As seen in the picture here,
there's a pin on the side of
the PHY that says one of these
ports is not like the others.
Run it only at 400.
If you forget to set this,
the PHY will talk 800 through that port,
and it might work briefly if you
have the right kind of cable,
but it probably won't.
And then the customer will
think the device is unreliable.
So just set the pin on the PHY,
tell it the truth,
everything will work fine.
Finally, in a bridge-based device,
it may be common to run the
FireWire silicon using power
that comes in over FireWire.
But if you have, say,
a big 3.5-inch drive mechanism,
that's going to need an AC adapter.
So that drive might be off,
even though the FireWire silicon is on.
Don't advertise that you are a hard
drive in your configuration ROM if you
don't actually have a working hard drive.
Because the software will load,
we'll try to talk to it,
we'll get errors,
the user will be confused, it's bad.
So there's creative
ways to cope with this,
like not advertising a
config ROM and so on,
to prevent this kind of problem.
Okay, most of that advice applies to all
the rest of the device categories too,
so I won't repeat it.
We'll just cover what's different.
Camcorders, television set-top boxes,
DVHS,
anything with audio and video in it.
Totally different driver stack.
The standards for these:
AVC General is the audio/video
command set that comes from
the 1394 Trade Association.
And then the specific commands
for the AVC Tape subunit
come from the same place.
Additionally,
these devices stream audio and video
using a standard known as ISO 61883,
also available on the web.
When one of these devices is plugged in,
a text called "IO FireWire AVC"
matches the AVC unit directory
found in the config ROM.
And you can see it here in Firestarter.
The config ROM is very brief.
All it says is "I speak
AVC." From that point on,
the discovery uses AVC commands rather
than any further config ROM mechanisms.
So the first thing IO FireWire
AVC.keks does is it sends AVC subunit
info commands to your device to
find out what subunits it supports.
For example,
in this camcorder I plugged in,
it has a tape recorder player
subunit and it has a camera subunit.
So if you look in IO reg using terminal,
I've simplified it here,
but you can see the
two different subunits,
type 4 and type 7.
For video-type devices, your best choice,
if you can, is to use QuickTime.
If you're writing an application
or a service that's all about just
bringing in video in real time,
such as PhotoBooth or iChat,
if you can use QuickTime,
then you won't be tied to FireWire.
You can use a USB camera,
you can use the built-in
iSight in your newer Mac,
you can even use a PCI capture board.
As long as it supports QuickTime,
it'll work with your app.
So,
that's your best choice if you can do it.
On the other hand,
if you're building a more
integrated application,
something that fiddles with the camera,
you know, runs the tape around
or does fancier things,
you may want more direct control.
In which case, your best choice,
probably,
is to start with our audio-video
services framework sample
code from the FireWire SDK.
It has very thorough and complete
services to discover this kind of device,
control this kind of device,
and establish streams to and from
this kind of device for real-time
video and audio streaming.
FireWire audio devices,
like an audio breakout box or
synthesizer or mixer board,
are a little different from the
audio/video devices we just discussed.
They're based on the same AVC standard
and the same 16.18.83 streaming.
Additionally, though,
it's recommended that you
follow the BridgeCo standard
for AVC connection management.
This helps the Mac to be able to have
certain expectations about how to
discover the inputs and outputs on
your device and how to sensibly connect
them and present them to the user.
The discovery is all the same.
We use AVC subunit info commands,
except we expect to see
Type 1 for audio or Type 12,
C hex, for a music device.
If so, we can support you with
Apple FW Audio KEXT and
hook you into Core Audio,
so you get standard audio services.
If the standard services are inadequate,
you can also talk to these
devices from user space,
or if necessary,
you can do your own kernel driver.
It is recommended that you
support the Level 1 or the
Level 2 connection management
according to the BridgeCo specs,
so that we'll have the most
seamless support for your device.
Coming in Leopard is Apple FW Audio 2.0,
with a number of
significant improvements.
The connection management APIs will be
available in user space in order to help
avoid having to go work in the kernel.
The audio streaming engine
has improvements in lower
latency and lower CPU overhead,
so there's more time available
for you to do your thing.
Support for multiple streams simultaneous
and multiple formats simultaneous
has been substantially improved,
so you can do richer kinds of things.
If you have an MLan
device or a MIDI device,
we'll have better support for those.
And finally,
the extended stream format from
the AVC Music subunit will be
supported in the 2.0 Apple FW Audio.
Recently,
there was a joint working group formed
between the 1394 Trade Association and
the Audio Engineering Society to
tackle a whole realm of use cases
for these pro audio devices.
Not just a simple home
studio application,
but say professional studios,
building infrastructure, PA,
all kinds of larger systems
integrated out of these devices.
If you're making an innovative
product in this area,
I recommend you get involved
with these groups so you can find
out what they're doing or maybe
even give them some direction.
There's another class of cameras out
there that's sort of webcam-like:
IIDC, the Industrial and
Instrumentation Digital Camera.
The standard for this comes straight
from the 1394 Trade Association.
Also, the Apple EyeSight is
based on this standard,
and we publish a tech note that talks
about the additional unique things
that were added to the EyeSight,
like its audio capability.
This is a little different
from the devices before it
because when you plug it in,
nothing loads.
Drivers are opened when
an application needs them,
say if you run iChat or Photo Booth,
at which time QuickTime iIDC digitizer
loads and finds this camera
and it becomes available
in the video input menu.
When that digitizer loads,
it matches the unit directory in
the config ROM for this device,
so you have to properly fill that in
to show that you speak this protocol.
Okay,
slightly different category of devices.
The Mac Pro and the Mac Book Pro have
expansion slots where the customer
can add extra interface cards.
PCI Express comes from the PCI SIG,
as shown there.
If you're going to make a FireWire card,
it should be OpenHCI,
which is available on the web.
And the PHY silicon just comes
from the basic 1394 standard,
which comes from IEEE itself.
This is very important.
If you're going to
build this kind of card,
pick good quality silicon and
grill your vendors carefully.
We have specifically designed the stack
to not support subclassing at this point.
FireWire is a multi-device bus.
Cameras, hard drives, audio devices.
It's really hard to work around
silicon bugs in a way that
satisfies all of those devices.
It's much better for everyone
to just pick silicon that works.
And there's plenty of good
silicon on the market.
So you can't write your own driver here.
You can't subclass ours.
You've been warned.
Finally, for a FireWire hub,
there's practically nothing to do.
There's no firmware, there's no software.
You should check out the self-ID
to make sure it's not claiming
that it wants to manage the bus,
which it's going to do very badly.
In addition to FireStarter,
we have a tool in the SDK called FiTool,
which can look inside the Fi over
the FireWire cable and read out
its internal control registers.
FiTool also has a copy
of the 1394 spec in it,
so as you mouse over each
bit in each register,
it'll tell you what that
bit is supposed to be doing.
Okay, finally,
if none of that was suitable,
if you're going to go innovate
something completely different,
that's great.
Here are some things that are recently
going on in the 1394 Trade Association.
There's an active group defining the
LinkFi interface for the 1600 and
3200 megabit versions of the standard.
There's a major effort going on
to implement 1394 over the coaxial
cable that's already used for
residential cable TV distribution.
And in fact, this week at the Cable
Lab Summer Conference in Keystone,
Colorado, two companies are demonstrating
implementations of this already.
One of them running at 200 megabits,
and one of them running at 400 megabits.
It's very impressive stuff.
The 1394 TA has a new
standard called VersaFi,
which I showed the Fi tool screenshot
there on the previous slide,
adds a few more registers into the
Fi and ways of talking to them,
so that you might be able to implement
a simple device with no link at all.
So it simplifies the implementation,
it reduces cost,
it could open up FireWire's advantages,
like long distance and high speed,
to a broader category of device.
I mentioned the
Pro Audio Working Group already,
a very heavy activity level there.
And if you've got some new idea,
the TA might be a great
place to come work on it.
There's 130 member companies all making
FireWire devices of one kind or another.
You can gain access to the
people who wrote the standards.
You can influence where the standards go.
There's a lot of opportunity there.
So there's their website at that URL.
Okay, that's it.
If you need more information on any of
the five topics that we discussed today,
you can contact Craig Keithley,
or you can nab him.
He's sitting in the front
row here when we're done.
He is the evangelist for just I.O.
technology in general on the Mac.
Plus, all of the sample code and other
resources that we've discussed
today are available in the WWDC 2006
section on Apple's developer webpage.
A couple of events coming up.
There is a Plugfest tonight
at Apple in the piano bar.
We will have FireWire, USB,
and Bonjour all together.
Bring your device,
or just come and we'll show
you the tools and techniques
that we've demonstrated here.
And tomorrow morning, from 9 to 11,
I think on the other side of this wall,
there is a Kernel Lab where we
will have our engineers present
and you can come learn more,
try hands-on developing or
subclassing a KEXT on Mac OS X.